EGL_INTEL_start_frame

    INTEL_start_frame

Name Strings

    EGL_INTEL_start_frame

Notice

    Copyright 2011 Intel Cooperation. All rights reserved.

Contributors

    Robert Bragg
    Neil Roberts
    Tapani Pälli

Contacts

    Robert Bragg, Intel (robert.bragg 'at' intel.com)

Status

    Issued

Version

    1 - Jul 25, 2011

Number

    TBD

Dependencies

    Requires EGL 1.4

    This extension is written against the wording of the EGL 1.4 
    Specification.

Overview

    The aim of this extension is to expose enough information to
    applications about how the driver manages the set of front and
    back buffers associated with a given framebuffer to allow
    applications to re-use the contents of old frames and minimize
    how much must be updated for the latest frame.

    There are lots of different ways for a driver to manage these
    buffers, from double buffering, different styles of triple
    buffering and even n-buffering or simply single buffer rendering.
    We also need to consider that power management events or memory
    pressure events might also result in some of the buffers not
    currently in-use being freed.
   
    For example if you consider a double buffered application with a
    small spinning icon in a toolbar, but everything else is static
    then there may be 100s of frames drawn to animate the icon but
    they all only need to update the area covering the icon if its
    known that back-buffers are being recycled. In this case we expect
    that at the start of each frame the current buffer contains the
    result of rendering from two frames ago; that means the
    application can keep track of all the regions that have changed
    over the last 2 frames and by unioning that region with the region
    of the icon it would know what needs to be redrawn to repair that
    old buffer for a new frame.

    This extension lets you explicitly start a new frame in a way that
    the driver can report what age the contents of the back buffer have.
    The back buffer can either be reported as invalid (has an age of 0)
    or it may be reported to contain the contents from n frames prior to
    this new frame.

    For many use-cases this extension provides a more efficient
    replacement for using the EGL_PRESERVE EGLconfig option especially
    when considering deferred rendering hardware. EGL_PRESERVE
    adds a direct dependency for any frame n on frame n - 1, but
    it may also stop the driver from being able to pipeline multiple
    frames and imply a costly copy-back of data by effectively mapping
    the n - 1 framebuffer as a large textured quad used to bootstrap
    frame n.

New Procedures and Functions

    EGLBoolean eglStartFrameINTEL(
		    EGLDisplay dpy,
		    EGLuint *frame_age);

New Tokens

    None

Additions to Section 3.7 of the EGL 1.4 Specification (Rendering Contexts)

    Add the following text to a new subsection titled "Starting a new
    frame"

	It is not required that the EGL API be used to explicitly
	start a frame, since all client APIs can start a new frame
	implicitly. (For example glClear can be used to start a frame
	with OpenGL.) If EGL is used to start a new frame though
	applications can get important information about the initial
	contents of the back color buffer so that applications may be
	able to avoid redrawing the full contents of the buffer.
	Applications can use

	EGLBoolean eglStartFrameINTEL(
		    EGLDisplay dpy,
		    EGLSurface surface,
		    EGLuint *frame_age);

	to optionally notify EGL that they are starting a new frame to
	ensure that there is a back-buffer ready for rendering too and
	to determine the integrity of that back-buffer as an age
	measured in frames elapsed.

	On success, EGL_TRUE is returned. <surface> identifies the
	surface to be rendered too. <frame_age> is used to return to
	the caller the age of the current back-buffer's contents
	according to how many frames have elapsed since it was last
	used. For example with a single buffered drawable the age
	would usually be 1. With a double buffered drawable the age
	would usually be 2. A <frame_age> of 0 means that the contents
	of the back buffer are undefined.
	    On failure, EGL_FALSE will be returned. An
	EGL_NOT_INITIALIZED error is generated if EGL is not
	initialized on dpy. An EGL_BAD_PARAMETER error is generated if
	<surface> doesn't refer to a valid EGLSurface or if
	<frame_age> is NULL.

	If the EGL driver decides to free un-used back-buffers when
	the system is under memory pressure or in response to
	power-management events then EGL will simply return a
	<frame_age> of 0 when it allocates a new buffer at the start
	of a new frame. This means that applications can use this API
	to safely rely on the contents of old back-buffers to
	potentially reduce the amount of redrawing they do each frame.

	If the EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED swap behaviour is in use then it can
	be assumed that eglStartFrameINTEL will always report a frame age
	of 1. It is recommended where possible though that the
	EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED swap behaviour not be used though since it can
	have severe performance consequences. eglStartFrameINTEL can often
	replace the need for using EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED without adding
	a dependency for each frame on the previous frame which is the
	detail that usually make EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED in-efficient.

Dependencies on OpenGL ES

    None

Dependencies on OpenVG

    None

Issues

    What are the semantics if EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED is in use

    RESOLVED: eglStartFrameINTEL will always return 1 in this case. More
    clarification about this was added along with the recommendation to
    use eglStartFrameINTEL instead of EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED when possible
    to avoid the in-efficiencies of introducing a dependency for each
    frame on the previous frame.

Revision History

    Version 1, 25/07/2011
      - First draft
    Version 2, 03/08/2011
      - Clarified semantics for using EGL_BUFFER_PRESERVED
